[back](/writing.html)

# Food

In the 1733 Poor Richard's Almanac, Benjamin Franklin wrote, "Eat to live, and not live to eat." This Christmas I had the chance to reflect on Franklin's maxim during two weeks with my friend and her family in Nantes, France—an appropriate setting, given that Franklin appropriated his quote from the French playwright Moliere.

I didn’t even see one fat French person, although everyone seemed to live to eat. It's no wonder we borrow phrases like bon vivant, bon apetit and joie de vivre: all the French people I met spent hours per day cooking, grocery shopping , eating, and even watching food on TV. The local news coverage that Americans reserve for "suspected arson" (all fires) was instead dedicated to repeating a plough-to-plate narrative, in which area farmers would explain details of harvesting X and area shoppers would then eat X. It’s as though France began as a country where everyone ate astronaut rations, and only recently discovered real food. Each night, the family Girard stacked our table with goose liver, duck pate, frogs, shrimp, goat cheese, and most of the mollusk family—pretty much everything carbon-based except french fries. It’s suspicious that France has exported both a maxim they ignore and a potato recipe they ridicule…almost as though they were fattening up Americans to eat for a 5-hour Christmas dinner.

Americans neither eat to live nor live to eat. I can't well explain our relationship to food, except that we sometimes want our food storied and challenging—as though food were something you put on your resume or in the opening to an obituary. Other times, we love food with awesome novelty features like the Jimmy Dean Sausage & Chocolate Chip Pancake On a Stick—as though we didn’t actually eat food but rather just read descriptions of it in catalogues on airplanes. To an American like myself, the most culturally shocking aspect of France was the extent to which everyone savored, making an exertion to explore the sensation of taste while in the act of eating. Most American “foodies” I know are either snobbish or thrilled with the creative process of cooking, but not eating.

Today, the irony is that it’s England—Benjamin Franklin’s erstwhile enemy—whose attitude towards food most honors his aphorism.  No one can beat the English at eating merely to survive. The shelves of boxed, cold sandwiches—assembled in factories from little else than white bread, eggs and mayonnaise—testify proudly that England really is the birthplace of the Industrial Revolution, and also that its inhabitants really could not care less about food. The force that spread British colonies worldwide is clear: everywhere your ships landed, in whatever forbidding and nutritionally depraved hinterlands, the English everyman could honestly say, “Well, the food isn’t so bad, and the weather is definitely an improvement.”